---
title: "Guide for BA dissertation students"
date: July 2021
author: Luke Elson
---

([Back to Luke's homepage](../index.html))


I'm glad to be supervising your dissertation! I enjoy supervision, and
I've learnt a lot of philosophy from it.

This document sets out some expectations and advice. Nothing here is set
in stone... it's just how I normally do things, and some advice that
I've picked up over the years.

The dissertation is far more independent than other philosophy modules.
I won't chase you up about deadlines or meetings, and it's up to you to
manage the year-long project. My role is to make comments and
suggestions, and offer advice. I won't be the main marker at the end of
the year, and at the end of the day you can choose to ignore my
advice---it's your work.

You should take the dissertation seriously. It is worth 40
credits---because the third year is worth twice as much as the second
year, it is worth **four times** as much as a 20-credit second-year
module.

If this doesn't appeal to you, why not switch to an Independent Learning
Module, which counts for less and takes place entirely in the Summer?
The ILM is a perfectly respectable option, and many of our best students
(including several who've gone on to further study in philosophy) have
done it. I'd urge you to consider a change now, whilst you can still
easily pick up an extra module to cover the credits.

But if not, read on...

## The Process

1.  You will have submitted a short proposal early in the Summer break,
    and on that basis been assigned to me as a supervisor.

2.  You should read a couple of books over the Summer break if possible.
    No need to take notes: just get familiar with some of the
    literature.

3.  Around the start of Autumn term, you contact me to discuss your
    topic (maybe sending me your earlier proposal), and I might ask you
    what you are reading, and make some suggestions. Probably if you are
    reading this document, this has already happened.

4.  The **Autumn assessed proposal** sneaks up surprisingly quickly, so
    if you haven't done anything over the Summer then now is the time to
    get reading.

5.  The usual system is that you email me to arrange a meeting,
    attaching a draft of some work, and I'll comment on the draft and
    return the document to you by email. Then at the meeting we talk
    through my comments.

6.  I need at least a week to properly read something and make comments.

7.  You can send me a draft of a section, or even your summary of and
    reactions to something you've read. But please don't send a
    bullet-point plan---I can only comment effectively on complete
    sentences/paragraphs.

8.  Especially when the busy Summer term comes, I can't read multiple
    drafts of the full dissertation. I will definitely read one full
    draft, but it'll take me at least a week to do so, and I'll probably
    have substantial comments (meaning changes for you, if you agree
    with my comments).

## Advice

1.  Don't leave it past late Spring term to write a full draft, because
    you might not have time to make major changes.

2.  Don't forget the proposal and presentation. They count for a huge
    chunk of your mark, and are a good chance to get feedback from other
    people.

3.  Take ownership of the process. For example, if you've not written
    something you're happy to discuss, email me saying so and moving the
    meeting back by a week or two. Meetings without anything written to
    discuss can often be unstructured and not very helpful.

4.  But if you are feeling stuck, email me or arrange a meeting and we
    can talk through the issues. I'd much rather you stay in touch,
    whether or not you have anything written. If we chat frequently,
    then every meeting is low stakes and you don't have to worry too
    much about whether you are on track. Often just talking about it can
    help with the work. (See 'rubber duck debugging'.)

5.  During the academic year, I think if you do an hour a day of solid
    work (reading or writing) on your dissertation, you'll be in a
    really good position.

6.  Think about the dissertation as 4 normal-length essays, plus an
    introduction and a conclusion. This will help you to maintain a
    clear structure, and prevent the task from being overwhelming.

7.  Try not to think of the dissertation as a chance to finally lay out
    your view on everything philosophical! The usual essay advice of
    covering a small topic in depth applies. The dissertation is about
    the length of a standard journal article, not a long book: it's an
    opportunity for more depth, not more topics.

8.  In an essay it might be fine to simply show that someone's argument
    doesn't work. But in the dissertation you have space to ask deeper
    questions: ok the argument doesn't work as it is, but are there any
    tweaks that could fix it? Why, or why not?

9.  As with all philosophical work, make sure to anticipate and respond
    to at least one line of objection. This is crucial in a
    dissertation, because the "I didn't have space" excuse won't fly.

10. The following might not apply to every dissertation, but I think it
    does to most: make sure your work provides an *argument*, with
    explicit premises and conclusion, perhaps numbered. If you split it
    into 4 normal-length essays, as above, you might imagine each of
    them defending a step in the argument, for example.

11. Don't be pretentious. The best bits of philosophy are (at least in
    my opinion) written in clear, simple language that doesn't try to
    sound too 'academic'. Use jargon if you need to, but make sure to
    explain what it means. The person marking the dissertation is almost
    certainly not an expert in the topic... you need to teach it to
    them, and show off your understanding in the process.

## The mechanics of writing

1.  I like handwriting the first draft of a paper. It forces me to
    actually type up a real second draft, rather than just fiddling with
    the first draft in Word. Worth considering if you get stuck, but I'm
    not going to read and comment on handwritten work!

2.  Right now, get set up with a reference manager that can keep track
    of citations. I like [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/) -- it's not
    the easiest to use, but it's free and will manage your PDFs.

3.  Don't spend ages fiddling with the introduction, then rush to do the
    more difficult bits. Do it the other way around! With the
    challenging contentful bits done, the introduction is easy.

4.  Try to keep everything dissertation-related in one notebook --
    perhaps a real paper one. All notes, plans, drafts, etc. This will
    prevent "I remember I read this quote but I've lost it..."

5.  It's very common that as you write and read, you change your mind
    and interests. That's fine, so don't worry about sticking to the
    original title. The final dissertation will be marked as a
    free-standing document, so follow your interests where they lead
    you.

This list might make the process seem like overwhelming drudgery. But it
doesn't have to be! The dissertation done right can finish off your
degree on a high, having written and thought about a topic of your
choice that fascinates you. Done wrong, you are up at 2am a week before
the deadline, emailing me a first draft and hoping that I can get
comments to you in time for you to make changes. I hope the tips in this
document help you avoid the second scenario.
